Recognizing survival responses in behavior,
looking beyond the reaction.
You may have seen this
A young person reacts quickly.
They raise their voice.
They walk out.
Or they just shut down completely
and in that moment,
it can feel like a choice,
like they're being difficult,
like they're refusing to engage.
But think about this.
What if they're not choosing that behavior at all?
What if their body is reacting before they've had time to think?
Because that's what survival responses are.
When the people we support feel unsafe,
or even just perceive something as unsafe,
their body can move straight into fight,
flight,
or freeze.
And it happens fast,
faster than thinking,
faster than reasoning.
So what you see on the outside,
the aggression,
the avoidance,
the shutdown.
Is actually the body trying to protect itself.
Now this is where things often go wrong in practice.
We see the behavior.
And we respond to the behavior.
We challenge it,
we question it.
We try to regain control of the situation,
but if that young person is already in a survival response.
They're not able to process that in the way we expect.
So instead of calming things down,
We can unintentionally escalate it.
What this means in practice is recognizing the signs early.
You might notice a change in tone.
Body language shifts,
they become more alert
or more withdrawn.
That's the point where you've got the best chance to respond differently,
because once they're fully in that response.
It's not about reasoning anymore.
It's about safety.
Think about a time when you felt under pressure.
Your reaction probably wasn't calm
or carefully thought through.
Now imagine that feeling,
but stronger
and happening more often.
That's what some of the people we support are dealing with.
Behavior is often communication,
and survival responses are the body saying,
I don't feel safe right now.
So what does good practice look like?
It means slowing things down,
keeping your tone steady,
avoiding confrontation where possible,
giving space when it's needed.
Not ignoring behavior,
but responding in a way that reduces threat.
Because
the moment you reduce that sense of danger.
The young person has a chance to come back into a place where they can think again.
And that's when things start to shift.
From a safeguarding point of view,
this is crucial.
If we misunderstand survival responses,
We can increase risk without meaning to.
But when we recognize them,
We reduce escalation,
we support regulation,
and we create environments where young people feel safer.
And when people feel safer,
they behave differently.